Course Title: “Our Hearts Full of Ovens, and Our Sad Feet:” The Hum/Animal in Literature

Semester: Fall 2013

Course Hours Per Week:		2 hours of theoretical work
					                2 hours of practical work
					                3 hours of homework

Office Hours: Mon, Tues and Fri 10-11, and by appointment 

Prerequisites: Students must have successfully completed Introduction to College English
		(603-101) to register for this course.

Course Description:

Starting with Gilgamesh, one of the earliest works of literature ever recorded, animals have featured heavily 
in the literature of human beings. This course will examine why.  Focusing on how the theme of animal versus human 
has been treated in literature, we will explore the ever-shifting line that separates and yet also unites the 
human animal and non-human animal.  The philosophical and moral issues that emerge from this complex, often 
conflicted relationship continue to be sources of intense discussion and debate. Thus, alongside the reading 
of imaginative literature, philosophy, poetry and various non-fictions, we will integrate readings in the 
growing field of animal studies.  The questions that the literature demands will be the fodder for discussion 
and written work in the course: What is a human? What is an animal?  What responsibility do we have towards 
non-human species?  How do animals in literature serve to clarify (or muddy) our view our human “nature?” 
How do you represent the inner workings of a being that does not speak your language and whose mind is seemingly 
unreachable, unknowable?  Is it possible to have a true understanding of animals at all?  By the end of the 
course, students will be able to assess the human-animal relationship in historical and literary contexts, 
to form their own educated opinion on the relationship between human beings and other sentient beings, and 
finally to contemplate how our understanding of animals will define the landscape of our shared futures. 

Objectives and Standards: 

The objective of this course is to enable students to apply a critical approach to literary themes.  
Students will learn to recognize a work’s literary themes, cultural context and value system.   Students will 
also be able to analyze a text from a thematic perspective.

On successful completion of this course, students will be able to produce a 1000-word analytical essay with the 
aid of reference material.  This essay will demonstrate a comprehension of themes, literary elements and rhetorical 
devices.  This essay will also demonstrate use of appropriate terminology and thorough revision of form and content.

Methodology: 

On average, one hour of the class time each week will involve short lectures, close readings of selected passages 
of literature, discussion of literary elements such as plot, character, tone, style and structure, as well as 
discussion of the major theories regarding animal and human interaction and their application to the literature 
we are reading. 

Through lectures, class discussions, group and individual assignments, students will be invited to explore, 
discuss and clarify the features of the animal and human relationship as it is represented in literature, as 
well as to introduce the historical and cultural background of the literary works studied and to develop 
strategies for writing academic essays.  

In class we will engage in a variety of learning activities, including individual responses and assignments, and 
pair and group work and projects.  Other assignments may include in and out of class writing activities such as 
short textual analysis paragraphs, thesis statements and outlines.  These activities and assignments will help 
us in our close investigation of the themes and ideas present in the literary works.

Towards the end of the semester, students will each give a 5-10 minute presentation on a subject of their choosing. 
The goal here is to strengthen your oral presentation skills, and give you a chance to interpret the theme of the 
course through your own unique voice and perspective, applying it to a current issue in the realm of animal rights.

Reading List (Required):

Class Reader: The Hum/Animal in Literature Compiled by Christine Rikkers. Montreal: Vanier College Printing Services, 2013.    

Butler, Octavia   Blood Child

Coetzee, J.M.  		The Lives of Animals

Kafka, Franz.  		Metamorphosis 

Martel, Jann.  		The Life of Pi  

Woolf, Virginia   Flush


Evaluation:

One in-class 750-word analytical essay 							                                25%
One take-home 1000-word analytical essay							                              25%
Short assignments, group projects and reading quizzes					                      20%
Mid-term exam (in-class): multiple choice answers to questions on course reading		20%
Oral Presentation										                                                10%

Cheating and Plagiarism Policy: Any form of cheating or plagiarism will result in a grade of zero on the test or 
assignment, and a letter from the teacher will be placed in your file.  A repeated offence may lead to even more 
serious consequences.  Please consult the College Catalogue, the Student Handbook and your teacher for more 
information.

Attendance Policy:

Regular attendance and active participation are required throughout the term.  Missing more than 10% of in-class 
work without a valid reason seriously jeopardizes a student’s chance of passing the course.  Students who miss 20% 
of in-class work will likely fail. Students who will be absent from classes for religious reasons must inform their 
teachers, in writing at the beginning of the semester, of the dates of these holidays and make up the work missed.  
These students will not then be penalized for these absences.  Students with justifiable absences must submit 
original and verifiable documentation, such as a medical note, upon their return to class.  Students are responsible 
for making up any work missed due to justifiable absences.

Mediation and Grades Review: 

Students are reminded that the English Department has two committees, which deal with student complaints.  
The Grades Review Board reviews complaints concerning the grading of assignments, and the Mediation Committee 
reviews complaints other than those dealing with student grades.  Information on how to contact these committees 
is available from your teacher, the English Department Coordinator, and the office of the Faculty of Science and 
General Studies.

Late Work

Essays: Essays will be reduced by a ½ grade for each day they are late. Note that this does not mean each class day, 
but each day of the week, as we only meet twice a week.  If you know in advance that you will be absent on the 
due date of an essay, you should turn your work in early.  

Personal Difficulties:  

Students who are experiencing severe personal difficulties which affect their ability to pass the course should 
communicate with the instructor.  No accommodation can be made for a student in this situation unless they make 
an effort to communicate.

Class Guidelines

➢	Turn off and put away all Laptops, iPhones, Androids, iPads, iPods, etc. before class begins.  It is my desire 
that we should have a completely beep-free class.

➢	Don’t chat with your classmates while I’m talking, or while they are talking.  It’s disrespectful.  

➢	Your attendance is absolutely essential to the class.  This is not a lecture-based class, nor a class where 
I’ll simply be giving you information and having you give it back to me. The reading of literature is a 
profoundly personal and unique experience.  Therefore, each and every one of your voices, opinions and 
insights are valid, welcome (and expected) in class.  And in order to add to the discussion, you must actually 
be physically present.

